[Music]
so this game is very simple all you have
to do is read what you see right so I'm
gonna count you so we do it all to it
I'll do it together okay one two three
amazing what about this one one two
three all right one two three
if you were Portuguese right how about
this one one two three what are you
reading there are no words there I said
read what you're seeing right literary
says what are eaten right that's what
you sort of said right
why is this is because perception is
grounded in our experience right the
brain takes meaningless information and
makes meaning out of it which means we
never see what's there
we never see information we only ever
see what was useful to see in the past
right
which means when it comes to perception
were all like this frog right it's
getting information is generate behavior
that's useful
Oh
and sometimes when things don't go our
way we get a little bit annoyed right
but we're talking about perception here
right and perception underpins
everything we think we know we believe
our hopes our dreams the clothes we wear
falling in love everything begins with
perception
now if perception is grounded in our
history it means we're only ever
responding according to what we've done
before but that creates a tremendous
problem because how can we ever see
differently now I want to tell you a
story about seeing differently and all
new perceptions begin in the same way
they begin with a question
the problem with questions is they
create uncertainty now uncertainty is a
very bad thing it's evolutionary a bad
thing if you're not sure that's a
predator it's too late ok even
seasickness is a consequence of
uncertainty all right if you go down
below in a boat your inner ears are
telling you you're moving your eyes
because it's moving in register with the
boat say I'm standing still your brain
cannot deal with the uncertainty of that
information and it gets ill the question
why is one of the most dangerous things
you can do because it takes you into
uncertainty and yet the irony is the
only way we can ever do anything new is
to step into that space so how can we
ever do anything new well fortunately
evolution has given us an answer right
and it enables us to address even the
most difficult of questions the best
questions are the ones that create the
most uncertainty they're the ones that
question the things we think to be true
already right it's easy to ask questions
about how did life begin or what extends
beyond the universe
but the question what you think to be
true already is really stepping into
that space so what is evolutions answer
to the problem of uncertainty it's play
now play is not simply a process experts
until in play will tell you that
actually it's a way of being play is one
of the only human endeavors where
uncertainty is actually celebrated
uncertainty is what makes play fun all
right it's adaptable to change right it
opens possibility
and it's cooperative it's actually how
we do our social bonding and it's
intrinsically motivated what that means
is that we play to play plays its own
reward now if you look at these five
ways of being these are the exact same
ways of being you need in order to be a
good scientist science is not defined by
the method section of a paper it's
actually a way of being which is here
and this is true for anything that is
creative
so if you add rules to play you have a
game that's actually what an experiment
is so armed with these two ideas that
science is a way of being and
experiments are play we asked can anyone
become a scientist and who better to ask
than twenty-five eight to ten year old
children because they're experts in play
so I took my be arena down to a small
school in Devon and the aim of this was
to not just get the kids to see science
differently but through the process of
science to see themselves differently
right
the first step was to ask a question now
I should say that we didn't get funding
for this study because that scientist
said small children could make a useful
contribution to science and the teacher
said kids couldn't do it so we did it
anyway right of course so here are some
of the questions I put them in small
print so you wouldn't bother reading it
point is that five of the questions that
the kids came up with or actually the
basis of science publication the last
five to 15 years right so they were
asking questions that were significant
to expert scientists now here I want to
share the stage with someone quite
special right she was one of the young
people was involved in a study and she's
now one of the youngest published
scientists in the world all right she
will now once she comes onto stage will
be the youngest person to ever speak at
Ted right now science and asking
questions about courage now she is the
personification of courage because she's
going to stand up here and talk to you
all so Amy would you please come up
[Applause]
[Music]
so Amy's gonna help me tell the story of
what we call the Black Mountain bees
project and first he's going to tell you
the question that they came up with so
go ahead Amy thank you very we thought
it was easy to see the link between
humans and apes in the way that we think
because we look like but we wondered if
there's a possible link with other
animals it'd be amazing if humans and
bees thought similar since they seem so
different from us so we asked if humans
of bees might sell complex problems in
the same way really who owns a note of
bees can also adapt themselves to new
situations using previous learn rules
and conditions so what if bees can think
like us well it'd be amazing since we're
talking about insect with only 1 million
brain cells but actually makes a lot of
sense they should because bees like us
come on as a good foul regardless of the
time of day the light the weather or
from any angle approaching from so next
step was to design a experiment which is
a game so the kids went off and they
designed this experiment and so that
will game and so Amy can you tell us
what the game was in the puzzle that you
set the bees the puzzle we came up with
was an if-then will we has to be foolin
not just to go to a certain color but to
a certain color flower only when it's in
a certain pattern there were only
rewarded if they went to the yellow
flowers if the yellow flowers were
surrounded by the blue or if the blue
flowers were surrounded by the yellow
now there's a number of different rules
the bees the lance of the suppose oh the
interesting question is which what was
really exciting about this project was
we and Bo had no idea whether it was
work it was completely new and no one
had done it before
including adults
including the teachers and that was
really hard for the teachers it's easy
for a scientist score and not have a
clue what he's doing because that's what
we do in the lab but for a teacher not
to know what's gonna happen at the end
of the day so much of the credit goes to
Dave Strudwick who is the collaborator
on this project okay so I'm not going to
go through the whole details of the
study because actually you can read it
read about it but the next step is
observation so here are some of the
students doing the observations they're
recording the data of where the bees fly
[Music]
can you help me what good scientist says
that right right so we've got our
observations we've got our data they do
the simple mathematics averaging
etcetera etc and now we want to share
that's the next step so we're going to
write this up and try to submit this for
publication right so we have to write it
up so we go of course to the pub all
right the one on the left is mine okay
now I tell them a paper has four
different sections and introduction of
methods a results a discussion the
introduction says what's the question
and why methods what did you do
results what was an observation and the
discussion is who cares right that's a
science paper basically so the kids give
me the words right I put it into a
narrative which means that this paper is
written in kids speak it's not run by me
is written by Amy and the other students
in the class as a consequence this
science paper begins once upon a time
the results section it says training
phase the puzzle dun dun da right and
the methods it says then we put the B's
into the fridge and maybe pie smiley
face right this is a science paper we're
gonna try to get it published so here's
the title page we have a number of
authors they're all the ones in bold are
eight to ten years old the first author
is black on primary school because the
forever reference it would be black
Walton at all and not one individual so
we submit it to a public access journal
and it says this it said many things but
it said this I'm afraid the paper fails
our initial quality control checks in
several different ways in other words
this starts off west by the time the
figures in crayon etc so we decided
we'll get it reviewed so I send it to
Dale Purvis who's the National Academy
of Science when a leading neuroscientist
in the world and he says this is the
most original scientific paper I've ever
read and it certainly deserves wide
exposure Larry and Maloney experts in
vision says the papers magnificent the
work would be publishable if done by
adults so what do we do we send it back
to the editor they say no
so we asked Larry and Natalie to hempel
to write a commentary situating the
findings for scientists right putting in
the references and we submitted to
Biology Letters and there it was
reviewed by five independent referees
and it was published
okay
[Applause]
[Music]
it took four months to do the science
two years to get it published typical
science actually right so this makes Amy
and her friends the youngest published
scientists in the world what was the
feedback like well it was published two
days before Christmas downloaded 30,000
times in the first day right it was
editor's choice in science which is a
top science magazine it's forever freely
accessible by biology versus only paper
that will ever be freely accessible by
this journal last year was the second
most downloaded paper by Biology Letters
and the feedback from not just
scientists and teachers but the public
as well and I'll just read one I have
red black on B's recently I don't have
words to explain exactly how I'm feeling
right now what you guys have done is
real true and amazing curiosity interest
innocence and zeal are the most basic
most important things to do science who
else can have these qualities more than
children please congratulate your
children's team from my side so I'd like
to conclude with a physical metaphor can
I do it on you oh yeah okay now science
is about taking risks so this is a
credible risk right for me not for him
right because we've only done this once
before
and you like technology right alright so
this is the
this is a pity me of Technology right
okay now okay now we're gonna do a
little demonstration right you have to
close your eyes and you have to point
where you hear me clapping alright okay
how about if everyone over there shouts
one two three brilliant now open your
eyes
we'll do it one more time everyone over
there shout where is the sound coming
from thank you very much what's the
point the point is what science does for
us right
we normally walk through life responding
but if we ever want to do anything
different we have to step into
uncertainty when you opened his eyes who
was able to see the world in a new way
that's what science offers us it offers
the possibility to step on uncertainty
through the process of play right now
true science education I think should be
about giving people a voice and enabling
to express that voice so I've asked Amy
to be the last voice in this short story
so Amy this project was really exciting
for me cause it brought the process of
discovery to life they show me that
anyone and I mean anyone has a potential
to discover something new and that a
small question
Kaleem into a big discovery change in a
way a person thinks about something can
be easy or hard it all depends on the
way the person feels about change but
change is way I thought about science
was surprisingly easy once you played
the games and then started to think
about the puzzle I then realized that
science isn't just a boring subject and
that anyone can discover something new
you just need an opportunity my
opportunity came in form of both and a
black awesome V project Thanks
[Applause]
you